---
title:  "Permissions Errors"
date:   2015-12-21 08:58:00 -0500
categories: development
---
In all of software development, some of the most pernicious errors I have encountered thus far have been permissions errors. I think this is because unlike most errors, which give some kind of message, a lot of the time when things fail because of permissions, there is no error or warning, things just don’t work. This is frustrating, especially for newbies, as if there is no message, there is nothing you can Google for help. It’s gotten to the point where if something is not working and I can’t think of a reason, I automatically start looking at permissions first. Here are some of my stories of problems they have caused me.

1. Some time before I got in to software development, I must have installed something that changed permissions of my root level of home directory (I use a Mac) to admin level. While as a normal user this never caused any problems immediately started causing problems when I got started as a developer (Somewhat embarrassingly, this was not fixed until several years later as described below. Even after I became aware of the permissions issue, I just thought this was normal, as Apple does all kinds of weird things, like hiding the user Library directory, even while keeping the system Library folder visible.). I started out programming by going through *Python the Hard Way,* and the very first lesson (lesson 0) had you use the command line to create a folder called Programming in the root of your home directory (as an aside, this seems a bit silly to me, as this is not required to start learning Python, and only adds an extra barrier to getting started). Over the course of an hour, I kept failing to create the folder, and I had no idea why, as this was my first exposure to the command line. I eventually manually created the folder in my documents directory using the Finder, and didn’t use the command line again for some time, partly because of this (Ironically, after this folder creating fiasco, I completed the first lesson, in which you actually get started programming something in Python, in less than five minutes).

2. Two years later, I was using Android Studio and trying to install an update on some SDK, which was inexplicably failing, with no error message or reason why. While by this time I was a bit more savvy, I still wasn’t sure what it could be, as I had been previously been using Eclipse, and hadn’t had this problem. After over an hour of googling I was able to figure out that it had something to do with the permissions at the root of my home directory, despite the fact that it wasn’t actually installing anything there. I changed the permissions, and all the updates magically started working.

3. I had gotten a deal to get cheap web hosting using Dreamhost, but after a year the deal was up, so after a bit of searching I decided to sign up with Namecheap. After uploading one of my sites to test it out (written in PHP), nothing was working, I was just getting a blank page. Initially I thought that it was some PHP error, as I had hard-coded all the include paths in my code (I know I know), but even after fixing that it was still the same. I finally got the idea to just upload a simple hello world PHP file, and when even that didn’t work, I knew it had to be something else. After much googling I found out that a few other people were having this error, and it turned out to be fixed by changing permissions of all PHP files to 755. Annoyingly, all other file-types had to be set to 644 or they wouldn’t work. I ended up writing a shell script that was called by PHP to automatically set all this. Interestedly, I noticed that several months later, this was fixed, with no explanation given.

In conclusion, if you’re writing a piece of software, please give helpful messages if there is a permissions error (I’m looking at you, Android Studio). NPM and Homebrew both do a good job of this, as they both give you and error and generally tell you what you can do to fix this. And to all you software developers just starting out (assuming you’re not using Windows), if something just doesn’t work for no reason, it just might be a permissions error.