---
title:  "Protect Your Passions"
date:   2015-12-30 09:01:00 -0500
categories: software-development life-lessons
---
Everyone tells you to follow your dreams by encouraging your passions, but no one acknowledges the dark side of that. It’s normal to hate your job if it’s doing something you dislike, but it’s a tragedy if you hate a job doing something you love. When your career is doing something you love there is the real possibility of burnout, until it becomes painful to perform an activity you used to enjoy. Burnout becomes a possibility whenever you put external pressures on activities instead of doing them naturally, when you feel like doing them. This is what happens when you replace internal motivation with external rewards. While the most obvious scenario is when you make a career out of a former hobby, it can also happen when you start studying a subject seriously at a school or with a teacher after or if you start cooking everyday for your family after doing it only occasionally for fun. The common denominator in all these settings is that you are taking something you had done for enjoyment and are now moving past your normal limits into boredom or drudgery. This has happened to me several times, the most painful examples include when I felt forced to write more music, faster than I had ever done before for my senior music composition recital and when as part of a cruise ship contract I had to perform music eight hours a day for months. The repercussions of both traumas have lasted for years, and still feel the effects to this day.

While I still don’t know how to fully prevent this, and don’t know if it can be fully prevented if the external forces are too great, here is what I do now to protect myself. The most important is to take this problem seriously, and to guard against it at all times. Next is to make sure to get enough sleep and take care of yourself physically, since feeling bad will make you unmotivated and resent your job, even if it’s doing something you enjoy. Finally, it’s important to not push things, as much as this is possible. Take breaks as soon as you feel bored or inattentive or even before, and pursue unrelated activities during your breaks and leisure time. This keeps your mind fresh and makes you anticipate returning to your vocation.