---
title:  "Lessons from the Job Hunt"
date:   2016-01-07 08:40:44 -0500
categories: software-development life-lessons
---
I'm kind of a cerebral person that likes to think things through to try to understand them, so sometimes I forget how much you can learn by actually doing something. I had always thought that you're supposed to figure out exactly what kind of job you want first, before looking for and applying to jobs. However, I learned that the job search process is really about discovery, as by looking through and applying you discover what kind of job you really want, and what you really want to become.

One of the things that I learned is that you should look for jobs based on what you want to do, rather than what you think you're qualified for. The first reason for that is that it is much less work. I was applying for web development, Java, SQL, and mobile development jobs, which meant I needed multiple generic resumes and cover-letters that I would then have to customize for each application. This meant that it took me almost forty-five minutes to finish an application because half the time I could not reuse a template I already had and so had to heavily customize an existing one. Once I decided to focus on web development, I only needed one basic resume and cover-letter template, and could finish an application in about ten minutes. This also helped me to see what kind of projects I should focus on for my portfolio and what fields I should focus my learning on. This led to a much greater amount of submitted applications, and more responses and interviews.

Second, if your sole reason for applying to a job is that you think you can got it, you might end up with a job you don't want, or at least one that shortchanges you. At best, the time you spend applying becomes a distraction from what you really want to do. I applied for an SQL developer night shift position even though I'm not interested in working the night shift or solely working with SQL; I only applied because I thought I was capable of doing it. Luckily, they never replied back, so I did not have to waste time on email exchanges and interviews for a position I didn't want. I also realized later that I might have shortchanged myself from getting a better job because I only applied to positions that I thought I might be hired for, rather than applying to all the jobs I thought I could do competently.

Lastly, the job search also has a was of clarifying both the skills and technologies that employers are looking for and what skills are deficient from your own resume. One thing I learned was how in-demand WordPress skills are for web development (in the NYC area at least) and that my biggest hole was not having any experience with it or an equivalent CMS system. This helps you prioritize what you need to learn, since you have real-world feedback that people are willing to pay money for people that have these skills. This is especially helpful for beginners, as one of the biggest obstacles to learning can be simply knowing what you need to know.

In conclusion, don't think of the job search as a necessary evil for when you're unemployed. Think of it as a voyage of discovery for what you want to become. Even if you already have a job you enjoy, simply looking through the want-ads online can highlight things you missing in your skill-set or opportunities you're missing in your workplace. 