---
title:  "Cruise Ship First Days"
date:   2016-01-28 09:02:00 -0500
categories: cruise-ships
---
While there are some things I still remember fondly about working on cruise ships, one thing that I don't miss are actually getting to the ship, and the first day there. As someone who completed 10 cruise ship contracts on 10 different ships, I can tell you, the first day and the days before my contract started were always the same, and always involved a lot of waiting and lack of sleep.

## Two Days Before My Contract Starts

I'm spending hours packing, looking for necessary items and double and triple checking to make sure I didn't forget anything since there will be no going back if I do, and it might be a while to get a replacement, if I ever do (Some highlights include searching all over Australia and New Zealand for a contacts lens case and all over Europe for reusable earplugs). As usual, I've waited till the last minute because I was using most of the stuff I needed to pack, so unless I want to buy two of everything it's not realistic to keep everything packed all the time. To be fair to myself, you don't always get much notice before you leave&mdash;one time I agreed to a contract on Wednesday and left on Sunday, completing all the my final projects for school in the interim. I also have to constantly juggle how much everything weighs, because I usually end up bringing two 50 lb checked bags and two carry-ons weighing 20-30 lbs each. By the end of this it's always well past midnight, and I usually have to get up early the next morning to catch my flight.

## The Day Before My Contract Starts

I'm exhausted, but the anxiety over leaving causes my to wake up early without trouble. I perform last minute checks over supplies and pack the car and head to the airport. Here is where the waiting begins. I wait to check-in, and hope my baggage is under the weight limit (on multiple occasions I've had to redistribute items between my checked bags and carry-on luggage). More waiting to go through security and then waiting until the plane arrives. Get on the plane and wait for it to take off. Try to sleep on the plane, but don't generally succeed. 

Finally get to destination and wait to go through immigration, and then at baggage carousel. For whatever reason, my flight almost always ends up being scheduled so that I arrive at my destination between 9 a.m. and 1 p.m. local time, so I have the whole day to myself, but it also means that I had an early flight and so am exhausted by this point and just want to go to sleep. To save money, all Carnival subsidiary cruise lines have cruise members stay at a hotel that is serviced by the airport shuttle, so I have to figure out what the schedule is/where the stop is for that. Laboriously drag heavy luggage to airport shuttle stop, usually got to the wrong place/direction at least once, due to weight of suitcases this takes at least 35 minutes. Wait for shuttle, after 10 minute ride get to the hotel and wait to check in (in one case there is a mix up between the cruise line and the hotel and have to wait in the hotel lobby for hours before taking a taxi to another hotel). Finally get to hotel room and deposit belongings. After the lack of sleep, pulling hundreds and pounds of luggage everywhere, and in the case of travel to Europe, jet-lag, all I want to do is sleep, but after 15 minutes of lying on the bed I force myself to go out, as this will be the last time I get a whole day to myself to explore for several months (in several cases, this will also be the only chance I get to see some places, as the ship will not return here again, so I have even more incentive to go out).

Head out and try to make the best of a situation where I try to appreciate/see all the sights that I can while being extremely tired. It goes as well as could be imagined under the circumstances, though I never get as much out of the experience as I would like. Head back to the hotel between 8 and 10 p.m. and go to bed.

## First Day of Contract

Wake up at 6 a.m. because pickup from the hotel is always obscenely early. As you can imagine, this does not improve my situation. Passengers can never be kept waiting, and cruise ship embarkation days are always short of time, so even though new crew members cannot board the ship until all previous passengers have disembarked (which usually isn't completed until 9 or 10 a.m.) we have to get to the ship by 8 ('just in case').

We get to the ship at 8, and surprise! the passengers are still on the ship so we will have to wait in the cruise terminal. While waiting we have to fill out a bunch of paperwork, such as if you have recently had diarrhea (no sane person would answer this affirmatively, as in the best case you would be immediately quarantined, and worst case you might be sent home).

Sometime after 9 a.m., we can finally board the ship. We gather all our luggage and wait to go through metal detectors before boarding. Once on-board, all the returning crew members immediately know where to go, so they take their stuff and leave, while all the new joiners and I have to wait around in the lobby for someone to come get us and show us where to go (this is one of the downsides to joining a different ship in each contract). Someone finally gets us and takes us down a maze of hallways to our rooms. I immediately become disoriented, and have no idea how I got from the gangway to my room&mdash;it will be a few days before this gets all sorted out.

There is more paperwork to be signed and dropped off at the crew office, and the first safety training is either at 11 a.m. or 1 p.m. I'm given a short tour of the ship by my music manager, though I will immediately forget how to get to most of the places I've been shown. By this time it will be time for lunch, so I'll eat and then go to the training. After this will be the first free time we've had all day, so I do some basic unpacking, take and shower and take a nap until 3. Around 3 or 4 is the passenger safety drill, so I try to remember where my safety position is, and after that is either our first band rehearsal or first performance. Then dinner, performance and finally bed. It's been a long few days.
