---
title:  "Learn To Type"
date:   2016-01-14 08:33:00 -0500
categories: software-development life-lessons
---
When I see questions from people on how to get started in development, one of the most valuable things I think you can learn is how to touch-type, if you don't know already. While software development is more than simply typing things up, everything you do is through the computer, and more specifically the keyboard, so learning to use the keyboard more efficiently will make you more effective in everything you do. It is even more valuable because even if software development doesn't end up being the career path for you, you will most likely end up using a computer regularly in you daily life, so unless we end up in a future where everything is controlled by touch-screens or virtual reality or voice control like in *Her,* your time investment will not be wasted. Surprisingly though, the speed improvement is actually not the largest benefit I have found from learning to type.

The largest benefit I found in learning to touch-type was actually that using a computer becomes much more implicitly enjoyable. Before, I had never noticed it, but I always felt that there was a barrier between me and the computer. As a musician, using a computer now feels like playing a musical instrument, like the piano. The computer feels like an extension of myself because like on a musical instrument I always know where my hands are and what they are doing without having to think about it, so that it feels like my thoughts are flowing straight from my head to the computer with no filter. It's a magical feeling when I choose to focus on it, and it's something that hunt-and-peck typists will never know.

Second, I've noticed that learning to type can improve your well-being from a health perspective because it affects your posture. People that can't type use the computer with their head bent down to look at the keys, which is bad for the neck. In contrast, typists look straight ahead at the monitor with a straight back and neutral neck. This is a difference that is not noticeable immediately, but over the course of 8 hours a day, 8 days a week it adds up.

Finally, there is the most obvious advantage, speed. As a hunt-and-peck typist using three fingers on each hand I could actually type at a fairly respectable 42 words per minute, but that is blown away by my current speed of 65 words per minute as a typist. While the difference may not sound like much to some people, the hours can definitely add up. In college, I had to write many five page papers, and I would generally write at the rate of an hour a page, or five hours total per paper. If typing could have increased my rate to forty-five minutes a page, or four hours per paper, I can't imagine how many free hours I could have had.

In conclusion, if you're unsure of what to learn, learn to type if you don't know already. As a computer user, it will be one of the best investments you ever make. 
