---
title:  "Bass Amp Settings"
date:   2016-02-25 08:50:00 -0500
categories: bass music-lessons
---
When I was first starting out as a professional musician, one of the things I had trouble with was getting a professional sound while using an amplifier. This was especially compounded once I started working on cruise ships, as I would have little choice in the kind or model of amplifier, and every venue I would be playing in had mediocre acoustics at best. At the beginning of my career, I would just keep the settings from the previous bass player, recording the positions of the dials with out any real understanding of what they meant or if they were appropriate for me. It took many years before I would finally realize an easy and fool-proof way to get the sound I wanted out of any amplifier.

The technique I finally settled on is very simple and easy to do, but I have found it always gives me good results. First, set all the equalization settings to flat, or 12 o'clock, and turn off all the extra features, such as compression, scoops or 'tone enhancers.' While playing the open strings of the bass, adjust the eq slightly as necessary, until the volume of all the strings is balanced. For instance, if the E string is slightly louder than everything else, I might slightly reduce the bass, or if the G string is softer than every thing else I might boost the treble slightly, and similarly adjust the mids for the A and D strings. If there is a compressor, I might turn it on slightly, around 30% percent or so, just enough to even out some of the attack from slap or heavy playing without squashing the dynamics too much. Besides that, I always disable all the other special eq knobs and features, as I have found they always make you sound worse than when they are off.